Welcome to Jeremy’s IT Lab. This is
a free, complete course for the CCNA.
If you like these videos, please subscribe
to follow along with the series. Also,
please like and leave a comment, and share the
video to help spread this free series of videos.
Thanks for your help. Also, remember to
sign up via the link in the description
to get all of the lab files for this course, so
you can try it out yourself in packet tracer.
If you want more labs like these, I highly
recommend picking up Boson’s NetSim for the CCNA,
click the link in the video
description to check it out.
It’s a network simulator like packet tracer, but
it’s even better, and it includes all of these
guided labs to not only help you get hands-on
practice configuring and troubleshooting,
but also deepen your understanding of the exam
topics. I used it myself when studying for my
certifications, so I feel confident
about recommending it to all of you.
If you want to get your own copy of NetSim,
please follow the link in the video description.
In today’s video we’ll try a few
methods of configuring IPv6 addresses,
as well as IPv6 static routes. We
haven’t covered IPv6 static routes yet,
but using the context-sensitive help
in IOS you’ll be able to figure it out.
Step 1 says to use EUI-64 to configure the
appropriate IPv6 address on the G0/1 interface of
R1 and R2. But before actually configuring
the addresses, we should examine the MAC
address of each interface and calculate the
EUI-64 interface ID that will be configured.
So let’s do that on R1 first. ENABLE. To
check the MAC address of an interface,
use SHOW INTERFACES G0/1. Up here near the
top of the output you can see the MAC address.
So, let’s calculate the EUI-64 interface ID,
and the IPv6 address that will be configured.
In this document I’ve written out
the process. Here’s the MAC address.
Split it in half, and then insert FFFE in
the middle. Finally, invert the 7th bit,
which makes the 0 a 2. That’s the EUI-64
interface ID. Add the network prefix, and
this is the IPv6 address that will be configured
on R1’s G0/1 interface. So, let’s configure it.
Back to R1.
CONF T. Before configuring the interface, I should
enable IPv6 routing, since we’ll try out some
pings later. IPV6 UNICAST-ROUTING. Okay, now let’s
configure the interface. INTERFACE G0/1. IPV6
ADDRESS 2001:db8::/64, that’s the network prefix.
Finally just add EUI-64 to the end. Okay, let’s
check the address that was configured. DO SHOW
IPV6 INTERFACE BRIEF. There it is. Notice that
a link-local address was automatically configured
also, and it uses the same EUI-64 interface ID,
but a different network prefix, beginning
with FE80 because it’s a link-local address.
Now let’s do the same process on R2.
ENABLE. SHOW INTERFACES G0/1. Here is the MAC
address of G0/1. Let’s return to that document.
Here is that same MAC address. To get the EUI-64
interface ID, split it in half, insert FFFE in
the middle, and finally invert the 7th bit.
That’s the EUI-64 interface ID. If you add the
network prefix to it, you get the IPv6 address
that will be configured on R2’s G0/1 interface.
Let’s go back to the CLI of R2. CONF T.
Once again, let’s enable IPv6 routing.
IPV6 UNICAST-ROUTING. Now let’s
configure the interface. INTERFACE G0/1.
IPV6 ADDRESS 2001:db8:0:1::/64 EUI-64. Okay, let’s
check the address. DO SHOW IPV6 INTERFACE BRIEF.
There it is, and a link-local
address was configured, too.
In step 2 we are told to configure the appropriate
IPv6 address and default gateway on PC1 and PC2.
Since we’re already on R2, I’m going to copy the
address we just configured, because this will
be PC2’s default gateway. Now let’s go on PC2.
First, we must enter the default gateway here.
I’ll paste in R2’s address. Now
let’s configure PC2’s own address.
It’s 2001:db8:0:1::2, with a /64 prefix length.
Notice that it already has a link-local address,
based off of the MAC address which you
can see up here. Okay, that’s all for PC2.
Now I’ll return to R1. Let me copy the
IPv6 address of its G0/1 interface.
Now I’ll configure PC1. First, I’ll paste
R1’s IP address as the default gateway.
Next I’ll configure PC1’s address,
2001:db8::2/64. Okay, that’s all for step 2.
Step 3 says to enable IPv6 on
the G0/0 interface of R1 and R2,
without explicitly configuring an IPv6
address on them. I’ll do that on R1 first.
INTERFACE G0/0. To enable IPv6 on an
interface, use this command, IPV6 ENABLE.
That’s it. That will automatically configure
an IPv6 address on the interface. What kind
of IPv6 address? It’s a link-local address.
Let’s check. DO SHOW IPV6 INTERFACE BRIEF.
There it is, and notice the EUI-64 interface ID
is different than G0/1’s, because the
interfaces have different MAC addresses.
Okay, next I’ll do the same on R2. INTERFACE
G0/0. IPV6 ENABLE. Let’s see the address that was
configured. DO SHOW IPV6 INTERFACE BRIEF. There it
is, a link-local IPv6 address beginning with FE80.
Finally, step 4 says to configure static
routes on R1 and R2 to enable PC1 to ping PC2.
We’ll cover IPv6 static routes in day 33,
but let’s get a little preview. There are
multiple ways to configure this, for example we
could configure a default route on each router,
but I’ll just configure a route to each specific
subnet. First, let me copy the link-local address
that was just configured here on R2, I’ll use it
as the next-hop for R1’s route. Now I’ll go on R1.
Let me EXIT back to global config mode. The
command to configure an IPv6 static route is
IPV6 ROUTE, now I’ll use the context-sensitive
help, the question mark, to see what’s next.
Just like in IPv4 routes, we have to configure
the destination. That is 2001:db8:0:1::/64.
Now let’s see what’s next. So, we can configure an
exit interface or the next hop. I’ll set the next
hop as the link-local address of R2 by pasting it
here. Okay, let’s try to enter the command. But
an error message is displayed. Interface has to be
specified for a link-local nexthop. So, when using
a link-local address as a next-hop, you can’t
just specify the address. You have to specify
the interface, too. If I use the context-sensitive
help, you’ll see that I can’t enter the interface
here. So, I need to put it before the next-hop.
Okay, so that’s the route here on R1. Now I’ll
scroll up and copy the link-local address of R1’s
interface, so I can use it as the next hop on R2.
Now let’s configure the route on
R2. EXIT. IPV6 ROUTE 2001:db8::/64,
then the exit interface, G0/0. Finally
I’ll paste in R1’s link-local address.
Okay, that’s all. So, let’s test out
these routes by pinging from PC1 to PC2.
PING 2001:db8:0:1::2. Okay,
PC1 is able to reach PC2.
So, in this lab we configured IPv6 addresses using
IPV6 ADDRESS EUI-64, enabled IPv6 on interfaces
without manually configuring an address, and then
tried out IPv6 static routes. In Day 33 we’ll go
in depth about IPv6 static routing. Now let’s
take a look at a lab in Boson NetSim for CCNA.
Okay, here's today's Boson NetSim lab preview.
The lab we're doing today is Configuring
IPv6 1. Here's the objective. Understand and
implement IPv6 addressing on the network,
and implement RIPng to implement dynamic
IPv6 routing. Now, dynamic routing in IPv6
isn't actually in the CCNA exam topics, but
let's take a quick look at it in this lab.
All of the commands you need to know
are listed here. IPv6 ROUTER RIP,
IPv6 RIP ENABLE. So you can complete this lab
even if you haven't actually studied RIPng yet.
Here are the IP addresses currently configured.
As you can see, IPv4 is already enabled on
the network. We're going to add IPv6 on
top of that. And the lab tasks. Task 1,
examine the initial network configuration.
Task 2, explore IPv6. Task 3, implement IPv6.
And finally task 4, verify IPv6.
So this is a pretty big lab.
For this lab preview, let's just do task 3,
implement IPv6. So let's do some configurations.
So part A, implement IPv6 addressing, step
1. You will implement IPv6 addressing on
the WAN links that connect the Tampa,
Orlando, Daytona, and Miami routers.
Okay, so these four routers, just these
WAN links. You will not implement IPv6
addressing on the WAN link that connects the
Miami and Key West routers or on the LANs.
Okay, and this diagram and the table show
the IPv6 addresses we will configure.
Okay, review the commands used to assign
an IPv6 address to an interface. Compare
these commands to the commands you currently
use to assign IP addresses to an interface.
So this means, the commands you
currently use refers to IPv4 addressing.
And the commands are quite similar. IPv4
uses IP ADDRESS, IPv6 uses IPv6 ADDRESS.
And most commands are like that, they're
almost identical between IPv4 and IPv6,
but for IPv6 instead of IP you have to enter
IPv6. Okay, on Tampa, Orlando, Daytona, and Miami,
enable IPv6 routing. Okay, let's do that. Here on
Tampa, oh that's right there's a password on these
routers. Okay, the console password is admin, and
the enable password is cisco, okay. Admin, enable,
cisco. And let's configure IPv6 routing. Okay,
that's it for Tampa. Next up, Orlando. Admin.
Okay, that's all for Orlando. We aren't
configuring it on Key West, so I'll go to
Daytona next. Admin, enable, cisco. IPv6
unicast-routing. And finally the Miami router.
Okay, so let's see what's next.
On Tampa, Orlando, Daytona, and Miami, assign
the appropriate IPv6 addresses. Refer to the
IPv6 addresses table. Okay, so we will configure
those addresses. I'm on Miami, so I'll start here.
First, interface serial0/0. IPv6 address
2001:0:1:3::2/64. Next, serial0/1. IPv6 address
2001:0:1:2::1/64. Alright, next I'll go to
Daytona. Interface serial0/0. IPv6 address
2001:0:1:0::2/64. Interface serial0/1. IPv6
address 2001:0:1:2::2/64. Okay next up, Orlando.
Interface serial0/0. IPv6 address
2001:0:1:1::2/64. Next up, serial0/1.
Okay, last one is Tampa. Serial0/0.
And serial0/1. Okay, that's it.
Next, implement IPv6 routing.
So this is what we haven't covered and it actually
isn't on the CCNA exam, but it's good to know. So,
step 1. Updated routing protocols capable of
working with IPv6 addresses must be used in
order for IPv6 routes to be exchanged with
other routers. You will implement RIPng,
RIP next generation, in this lab. RIPng
can function with IPv6 addresses, okay.
Number 2, identify the commands you should issue
to enable IPv6 dynamic routing with RIPng. How do
these commands differ from the commands you would
issue to configure interfaces for RIP with IPv4?
And then we will configure
RIPng on the four routers,
and use boson as the process identification
string. So, you can see those commands up here.
We need to know just two commands. IPv6
ROUTER RIP (process-name). This enables RIPng
on the router. And the big difference
here is the process name. So, in IPv4,
you could only have one RIP process running
at a time. You would use the command ROUTER RIP,
and then you would enable RIP on the
interfaces with the NETWORK command.
However, in RIPng, you enable RIPng
directly on the interfaces with IPv6 RIP,
followed by the process name, followed by
ENABLE. Okay, so I'll start here on Tampa.
Now, I believe that we could just
enable it directly on the interfaces
and the process will be automatically
created, so we don't have to use this
IPv6 ROUTER RIP command. Let's see if I'm correct
about that. INTERFACE RANGE SERIAL0/0 - 1.
Oh, I can't use the interface range command,
alright. So, interface serial0/0. That
might be something in NetSim, I'm not sure
about that. Interface serial0/0, IPv6 rip,
and the process name, it said to use boson, and
then enable. And then I'll do that on serial0/1.
Use the up arrow to use the same command.
Okay, now let's see if RIPng was enabled
by configuring it on the interfaces. SHOW
IPV6 PROTOCOLS...'protols'...PROTOCOLS.
IPv6 routing protocol is 'rip boson'.
Okay, looks like it's enabled.
So, let's do that on the other routers.
Here on Orlando, IPv6 rip boson enable.
Interface serial0, IPv6 rip boson enable.
Okay, then Daytona. IPv6 rip boson enable.
Interface serial0/0. Ipv6 rip boson enable. And
then Miami. IPv6 rip boson enable. Serial0/0,
IPv6 rip boson enable. Okay, so let's see
if they are actually exchanging routes.
SHOW IPv6 ROUTE. Okay, looks like Tampa has
learned a RIP route. It might take some more
time for it to learn the other routes.
How about on Orlando? SHOW IPv6 ROUTE.
Yep, we're getting some RIP routes, looks good.
How about Daytona? SHOW IPv6 ROUTE. Okay,
same thing here. And Miami, SHOW IPv6 ROUTE.
Okay, we're getting RIP routes, looks good. Okay
so to summarize, to configure RIPng, you can
create the process from global config mode with
IPv6 ROUTER RIP, followed by the process name,
and then enable it directly on interfaces
with IPv6 RIP, process-name, ENABLE.
However, if you enable it directly on the
interface, the process is automatically created
so you don't actually need to enter this command.
Okay, so I think that's all for that step. Yep,
we just did step 2 and step 3. We enabled RIPng
on the routers and used boson as the process ID.
Okay, next up we would verify our
configurations, verify the addresses,
test the pings, but I'll leave it here for today.
Okay, so if you want to get Boson NetSim, follow
the link in the video description. As you can
see, these labs are quite long, quite detailed,
much more extensive than my packet tracer labs,
so I highly recommend Boson NetSim for the CCNA.
Once again, if you want to get Boson NetSim,
follow the link in the video description.
Before finishing today’s video I want
to thank my JCNP-level channel members.
To join, please click the
‘Join’ button under the video.
Thank you to l33america, Brandon, Magrathea,
Njabulo, Benjamin, Deepak, Tshepiso, Justin,
Nil, Prakaash, Nasir, Erlison, Apogee, Wasseem,
Marko, Florian, Daming, Joshua, Jhilmar, Samil,
Ed, Value, John, Funnydart, Scott, Hassan,
Marek, Velvijaykum, C Mohd, Mark, Yousif, Sidi,
Boson Software, Charlesetta, Devin, Lito,
Yonatan, and Vance. Sorry if I pronounced
your name incorrectly, but thank you so much for
your support. One of you is still displaying as
Channel failed to load, if this is you please
let me know and I’ll see if YouTube can fix it.
This is the list of JCNP-level members at the
time of recording by the way, October 24th 2020,
if you signed up recently and your name isn’t
on here don’t worry, you’ll be in future videos.
Thank you for watching. Please
subscribe to the channel,
like the video, leave a comment, and share the
video with anyone else studying for the CCNA.
If you want to leave a tip, check the links in the
description. I'm also a Brave verified publisher
and accept BAT, or Basic Attention Token, tips
via the Brave browser. That's all for now.